REPRESENTING CHEMICAL
Example 1
REACTIONS
CONNECT THE DOTS
Hydrogen reacts with oxygen to form water (Figure .
Activity Book 2A;
We use word equations to show the substances that are involved in
11.1.2 How Do We
chemical reactions. A word equation includes the reactant(s) used and
Represent Chemical
Mo  masxo+ ao oene par
the product(s) formed in a chemical reaction. At times, it also shows the
Reactions?
condition(s) under which a chemical reaction occurs.
page 71
H
H
In a word equation, the reactants used in a chemical reaction are shown
+
H
H
H
H
on the left-hand side. The products formed in the reaction are shown on
H
H
the right-hand side of the word equation.
one oxygen molecule
two water molecules
two hydrogen molecules
For example, methane, a type of fuel, reacts with oxygen to form carbon
dioxide and water. Heat is the condition needed for the chemical reaction
Products:
\
Reactants:
to occur. The word equation for this chemical reaction is:
number of H atoms = ?
number of H atoms = ?
heat
number of O atoms = ?
number of O atoms = ?
methane + oxygen
carbon dioxide + water
Figure 11.4 Formation of water
reactants
products
Example 2
The word equation for another chemical reaction is shown below.
Methane reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and water
(Figure 11.5).
heat
calcium carbonate
calcium oxide + carbon dioxide
Word equation: methane + oxygen —carbon dioxide + water
reactant
products
H
REARRANGEMENT OF ATOMS
H
C
H
one carbon dioxide molecule
+
+
IN A CHEMICAL REACTION
CONNECT THE DOTS
H
During a chemical reaction, atoms of the reactants rearrange themselves
Activity Book 2A:
11.1.3 Looking
one methane molecule
two oxygen
H
H
H
and combine chemically to form products. The atoms of the products are
Closely at Chemical
molecules
always obtained from the reactants.
two water molecules
Reactions
pages 73-74
Reactants:
Products:
For example, one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms that make up
number of C atoms = ?
number of C atoms = ?
an oxygen molecule combine chemically to form one carbon dioxide
number of H atoms = ?
number of H atoms = ?
molecule (Figure 11.3).
number of O atoms = ?
number of O atoms = ?
Figure 11.5 Reaction of methane and oxygen
2
3
Count the number of each type of atoms on the left-hand side and
right-hand side of the equation in Figures 11.4 and 11.5. What can
you conclude?
C
The total number of atoms before and after a chemical reaction is
balanced. This means that the number of each type of atom remains the
same during the reaction.
Atoms of reactants combine in different ways to form products, but
Figure 11.3 Formation of carbon dioxide
no atoms are lost or formed in a chemical reaction. Thus, the mass of
Atoms are neither created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. Let us
the reactants is equal to the mass of the products. We say that mass is
look at two examples on the next page.
conserved during a chemical reaction.
CHEMICAL CHANGES
65
4
CHAPTER 11